+++
title = "notmuch setup"
lastmod = 2022-12-03T16:08:55-08:00
tags = ["emacs", "email", "macos"]
draft = false
comments = true
+++

I am a terminal enthusiast, and having keyboard bindings to hasten the workflow.
When it came to email, I started using pine in college, then later found a great
program called [sup](https://web.archive.org/web/20170224224512/http://supmua.org/). Sup had a great design, but had performance and
maintenance issues. This lead to a group of folks rewriting the system
in a more modular way using C++. There are already articles on the web
that describe how to build a system like this on Linux, I'll focus on
how to do this on a MacOS machine in this article.


## Why would I want to use a system like this? {#why-would-i-want-to-use-a-system-like-this}

At it's core notmuch is simply an index mechanism for your email.
It reads new email into it's index and applies tags. There are a few
different front ends written for notmuch including vim, mutt, and
emacs. For the purposes of this article I will focus on emacs.

The main proposition of notmuch is a fast mechanism to search
your pile of email. I currently have 200,000 emails in my index,
and the search is faster than outlook. The notmuch design makes it
possible to build a streamlined workflow based on tags
tailored to help the user climb out of their personal email hell.


## Installing the tools {#installing-the-tools}

First install notmuch. Being on an OS X machine, I used brew.

```bash
brew install notmuch
```

If you don't already have emacs installed, I suggest using [doom emacs](https://github.com/doomemacs/doomemacs).
Edit the init.el in the doom.d folder and uncomment the notmuch addition,
then run M-x doom/reload.

If you are using a vanilla version of email you'll need to do something like
the following, changing the version to match your environment.

```bash
ln -s /usr/local/Cellar/notmuch/0.18.1/share/emacs/site-lisp/* /Applications/Emacs.app/Contents/Resources/site-lisp
```


## Mail delivery {#mail-delivery}

Not much does not retrieve mail for you, it expects that your email
is delivered to a [maildir](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maildir) via a separate process. In the past I've used
elaborate systems with procmail, fetchmail, and qmail. These days I choose
a simpler system based on the python program called getmail.

We need to tell the MacOS keychain about our passwords. This will
enable getmail and emacs to fetch the passwords more securely.

```bash
/usr/bin/security add-internet-password -a 'EMAIL_ADDRESS' -s 'POP_SERVER_ADDRESS' -r 'pop3' -w 'PASSWORD'
/usr/bin/security add-internet-password -a 'EMAIL_ADDRESS' -s 'SMTP_SERVER_ADDRESS' -r 'smtp' -w 'PASSWORD'
```

Install getmail via pipx.

```bash
pipx install getmail
```

Create the directory where email will be delivered.

```bash
mkdir -p ~/mail/{cur,new,tmp}
```

Create the getmail data directory, where it will cache
the emails it's seen and it's log.

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.local/share/getmail
```

Next we need to configure getmail. Create the file ${HOME}/.config/getmail/getmailrc

```toml
[retriever]
type = SimplePOP3SSLRetriever
server = YOUR_POP_SERVER
port = 996
username = YOUR_EMAIL_ADDRESS

[destination]
type = Maildir
path = ~/mail

[options]
read_all = false
delete = false
delivered_to = false
recieved = false
password_command = ("/usr/bin/security")
message_log = ~/.local/share/getmail/getmail.log
```

The next thing to do is to hook it up as a pre-new hook in notmuch.
Meaning, when you tell notmuch to poll for new messages in the maildir
it will first exec the pre-new hook. My ~/.config/notmuch/default/hooks/pre-new
looks something like the following.

```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash
$HOME/.local/bin/getmail -q -r $HOME/.config/getmail/getmail -g $HOME/.local/share/getmail
```

Don't forget to make the pre-new script executable

```bash
chmod +x ~/.config/notmuch/default/hoos/pre-new
```

At this point you should be able to run the command "notmuch new" without errors.


## Enabling notmuch in emacs {#enabling-notmuch-in-emacs}

In doom emacs you'll want something like ths following:

```elisp
(require 'notmuch)
(setq user-full-name "whodevil"
      user-mail-address "whodevil@offthecob.info"
      smtp-server-address "your.smtp.server")
(setq send-mail-function 'smtpmail-send-it
      message-send-mail-function 'smtpmail-send-it
      smtpmail-starttls-credentials '((smtp-server-address "587" nil nil))
      smtpmail-default-smtp-server smtp-server-address
      smtpmail-smtp-server smtp-server-address
      smtpmail-smtp-service 587
      smtpmail-debug-info t
      starttls-extra-arguments nil
      starttls-gnutls-program "/opt/homebrew/bin/gnutls-cli"
      starttls-extra-arguments nil
      starttls-use-gnutls t
      notmuch-multipart/alternative-discouraged '("text/plain" "text/html"))
```

For easier navigation I disable evil for the notmuch modes.

```elisp
(set-evil-initial-state! 'notmuch-hello-mode 'emacs)
(set-evil-initial-state! 'notmuch-show-mode 'emacs)
(set-evil-initial-state! 'message-mode 'emacs)
(set-evil-initial-state! 'notmuch-search-mode 'emacs)
```

Let's also enable spell checking.

```elisp
(add-hook 'message-mode-hook 'flyspell-mode)
```

After restarting emacs you should now be able to run M-x notmuch-show, then press "G"
which exec's "notmuch new."


## Configuring Tagging {#configuring-tagging}

A tagging workflow will be personal. Here is the high level on how it works.
Tagging uses the query language defined by the tool. The script
~/.config/notmuch/default/hooks/post-new is called after pre-new during the
notmuch new call. Here is an example of what a post-new script might look like.

```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash
notmuch tag +github -inbox 'from:notifications@github.com and tag:inbox'
notmuch tag +github -inbox 'from:noreply@github.com and tag:inbox'
notmuch tag +review_request 'to:review_requested@noreply.github.com'

notmuch tag +cal -inbox 'mimetype:calendar and tag:inbox'
notmuch tag -unread 'tag:cal and tag:unread and subject:Accepted:'
```


## Conclusion {#conclusion}

I hope that whoever is reading this finds this information useful. I'm
a fan of notmuch mail, and hope that someone can benefit from my experience
with the system. The documentation on the [notmuch](https://notmuchmail.org/) website is great, and they
have an active community on the mailing list and libera #notmuch irc channel.
